========================================================
BOOK: Building Knowledge Graphs.pdf
========================================================

### RANGE: Identity Knowledge Graphs (Pages 147-157) ###

--- Page 147 ---
CHAPTER 9
Identity Knowledge Graphs
Being able to confidently identify a person or thing is a bedrock of business infor‐
mation systems. Given two records, can you determine if they represent the same
real-world thing (a person, an organization, a place, and so on)?
This problem commonly arises when integrating data from different systems, when
you need to reason that a record in one system has a counterpart (or not) in the other.
In that context, it is often referred to as entity resolution or master data management.
In this chapter, you will learn how knowledge graphs help you address the problem
of identity. You will see how the topology of a knowledge graph can give you the
confidence to link multiple entities and allow you to reason about them as if they
were a single golden record.
Knowing Your Customer
Identity and its myriad of difficulties is part of our everyday experience. For example,
Jane Coleman has been a happy and profitable customer of the Bank’s credit card for
several years.
Some months ago, Jane married her husband Peter and decided to take his name.
Jane Downe and Peter Downe are the owners of a joint checking account with the
Bank. But how can the Bank know that Jane Coleman and Jane Downe are the same
person? There’s no obligation on Jane to tell the Bank; indeed, she is free to continue
to use her maiden name (a not unusual practice among certain professionals like
doctors).
As a consequence, Jane regularly gets letters in her mailbox inviting her to open a
credit card account, which she already has. This is clearly a waste of time and money,
and probably a modest annoyance to Jane. But were Jane to be a fraudster, then
135

--- Page 148 ---
tracking down all her activities would be hampered by not being able to discern a
single identity.
When records have a consistent strong identifier, then it’s easy to connect them.
It’s one of the reasons why database practitioners are so concerned with things like
unique identifiers to help solve that problem. At a human level, think of things like
a Social Security number or a passport number for an individual, a product’s unique
SKU, or a unique company identifier issued by a government agency.
But not everything is as simple as a unique identifier. There are cases like the one
in the banking example described earlier where strong identifiers may exist but are
not consistent across all data. Maybe Jane opened her credit card account using her
driver’s license and the current account using her passport.
The data in Example 9-1 paints a typical picture of the problem. Rows 1 and 2 are
easy to link. You can see they have the same Passport entry, so you can safely reason
that Pete Downe and Peter J. Downe are the same person.
Example 9-1. Two records representing the same product
rowid, Source, AccountNo, Name, Passport, DriversLic, DOB
1, "Credit", 9918475, "Pete Downe", "VX83041",, 1987-03-12
2, "Current", 2436930, "Peter J. Downe", "VX83041",, 1987-03-12
3, "Credit", , "Jane Coleman", ,"49587640", 1989-10-28
4, "Current", 2436930, "Jane Downe", "RA14958", , 1989-10-28
Rows 3 and 4 in Example 9-1 are much harder to discern. There are different names
(Jane’s maiden and married names) and no common alphanumeric identifiers. Given
just this data, you’d have to conclude there’s a strong possibility of two people being
represented in those rows.
Things become even more problematic in the absence of strong identifiers. In those
cases, you will need to use whichever features are available, and often a combination,
to try to determine if two similar references refer to the same thing.
When Does the Problem Appear?
There are several scenarios where you may face duplicated data. Some of the most
common are:
Data integration
This is probably the most frequent case. Different applications store variants
of the same data for different functions, but often the data from multiple sys‐
tems needs to be combined for analytics purposes. Sales applications, customer
relationship management (CRM), marketing, and so on all hold customer data
(or product data, or event data…), but that data is collected and managed
136 | Chapter 9: Identity Knowledge Graphs

--- Page 149 ---
independently. This results in records being identified and described in different
ways by each, without consistent strong identifiers across systems.
Any analytic workload (analysis, reporting, predictive model building) of the
integrated data is unreliable without first having solved the duplication problem.
Duplicate records must be identified in order to merge them into master data
entities (golden records) to establish a single trusted view.
Anonymous activity
Many publicly accessible systems allow users to interact with them without
authenticating (e.g., to browse products). By definition, there is no authentica‐
tion of the user that can be used to identify them, but users do leave traces
(clickstream) of their activity and the devices they use to access those systems.
These traces will include features like time, cookie IDs, and even the navigational
choices they made, which can help identify patterns and eventually unique users
and sessions.
Intentional/fraudulent duplicates
Sometimes duplicates are created intentionally when bad actors are trying to beat
a system. Examples include:
• Individuals trying to get better insurance quotes by slightly adjusting some•
parameters like their address, their age, or others
• In more sophisticated cases, users trying to abuse service trials by authenti‐•
cating with different credentials (fake emails or names, etc.)
• Online sellers posting multiple small variants of the same product listing in•
an attempt to maximize its chances of being seen and ultimately sold
All these scenarios share the same fundamental question: given two records, do they
refer to the same or to different entities?
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step
The process of entity resolution includes three fundamental activities:
• Data preparation•
• Entity matching•
• Curation of a persisted record of master entities•
You can see examples of each in Example 9-2. You have three overlapping data sets
with personal information that need deduplication and integration into a single view.
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step | 137

--- Page 150 ---
Example 9-2. Three sample files
file: ds1.csv
╒═════════╤═══════════════════╤═══════════════════╤═════════════╤═══════════╤══════╕
│system_id│full_name │email │ssn │passport_no│yob │
╞═════════╪═══════════════════╪═══════════════════╪═════════════╪═══════════╪══════╡
│"1_1" │"Sidney Bernardy" │"sbernardy0@va.gov"│"252-13-7091"│"A465901" │"1979"│
├─────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────┼───────────┼──────┤
│"1_2" │"Ernestine Ouchterl│"eouchterlony1@sun.│"557-21-3938"│"CF3586" │"1999"│
│ │ony" │com" │ │ │ │
├─────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────┼───────────┼──────┤
│"1_3" │"Cherish Gosnall" │"cgosnall2@google.c│"422-45-7305"│"BS945813" │"1983"│
│ │ │om.br" │ │ │ │
├─────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────┼───────────┼──────┤
│"1_4" │"Husein Sprull" │"hsprull3@va.gov" │"123-03-8992"│"FG45867" │"1980"│
├─────────┼───────────────────┼───────────────────┼─────────────┼───────────┼──────┤
│"1_5" │"Jonathan Pedracci"│"jpedraccig@gateway│"581-96-2576"│null │"1991"│
│ │ │.com" │ │ │ │
└─────────┴───────────────────┴───────────────────┴─────────────┴───────────┴──────┘
file: ds2.csv
╒═════════╤════════════════════╤════════════════════╤═════════════╤═══════════╤════╕
│system_id│name │email │ssn │passport_no│age │
╞═════════╪════════════════════╪════════════════════╪═════════════╪═══════════╪════╡
│"2_1" │"Bernardy, Sydney Jo│null │null │"A465901" │"44"│
│ │anne" │ │ │ │ │
├─────────┼────────────────────┼────────────────────┼─────────────┼───────────┼────┤
│"2_3" │"Gosnall, Cherise" │"cgosnall@outlook.co│"422-45-7305"│null │"40"│
│ │ │m" │ │ │ │
└─────────┴────────────────────┴────────────────────┴─────────────┴───────────┴────┘
file: ds3.csv
╒═════════╤══════════╤══════════╤════════════╤════════════╤═══════════╤════════════╕
│system_id│first_name│last_name │email │ssn │passport_no│dob │
╞═════════╪══════════╪══════════╪════════════╪════════════╪═══════════╪════════════╡
│"3_1" │"Syd J" │"Bernardy"│"sjb@gmail.c│"252-13-7091│null │"1979-05-13"│
│ │ │ │om" │" │ │ │
├─────────┼──────────┼──────────┼────────────┼────────────┼───────────┼────────────┤
│"3_2" │"C" │"Gosnall" │null │"422-45-7305│null │"1983-04-23"│
│ │ │ │ │" │ │ │
├─────────┼──────────┼──────────┼────────────┼────────────┼───────────┼────────────┤
│"3_3" │"Jon" │"Pedracci"│"pedracci@ou│null │"TH834501" │"1991-12-05"│
│ │ │ │tlook.com" │ │ │ │
├─────────┼──────────┼──────────┼────────────┼────────────┼───────────┼────────────┤
│"3_4" │"Hana" │"Sprull" │"hsprull3@va│"465-63-9210│null │"1984-10-13"│
│ │ │ │.gov" │" │ │ │
└─────────┴──────────┴──────────┴────────────┴────────────┴───────────┴────────────┘
Data Preparation
The purpose of the data preparation phase is to make sure that the data meets
the required quality characteristics. When there are multiple data sets from
138 | Chapter 9: Identity Knowledge Graphs

--- Page 151 ---
independently governed systems, the different parts will also need to be harmonized
to make them comparable. This will include activities like aligning data types and
units (all distances in km, all prices in dollars, all scores between 0 and 1, etc.).
Even when all data comes from a single source and does not require those adjust‐
ments, all the features that you intend to use in the matching phase of the process still
need to be cleansed, standardized, and so forth to maximize the quality of the results.
This means making sure nulls are actually nulls (and not the string “null”), unifying
string format (all uppercase or all lowercase and encoding), trimming, removing
multiple spaces or special characters, and so on.
The first step is to model the data as a knowledge graph, storing it in a graph
database. Since each record represents a person, the model will be the simplest
possible. The obvious graph is with a Person node for each row and each column
providing a property on that node. Though the files are quite similar, there are some
file-specific columns (yob, age, or dob) which will introduce some variability in the
node structure. This is fine for now and will be dealt with before the entity matching
phase.
The Cypher script that loads each record into Person nodes is shown in Example 9-3.
This generic script takes the structure (columns) in the source file and adds a prop‐
erty called source for data provenance.
There is never a single way of doing things in data management.
Part of what was done in this phase could legitimately be carried
out before the data is loaded into the graph. The data preparation
work can be executed on the files directly using Python (and
pandas is a great tool for this) or as SQL transformations on a
cloud data warehouse after loading the files into tables. The scripts
in Example 9-3 would just be loading into the graph database
management system (DBMS) data in a format that is ready for
entity matching (with the exception of the graph features that can
only be extracted once the data is modeled as a graph). Simplicity,
robustness, and performance should guide you when choosing
your approach.
Example 9-3. Loading personal data files
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///ds1.csv" AS row
CREATE (p:Person) set p.source = "ds1", p += properties(row) ;
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///ds2.csv" AS row
CREATE (p:Person) set p.source = "ds2", p += properties(row) ;
LOAD CSV WITH HEADERS FROM "file:///ds3.csv" AS row
CREATE (p:Person) set p.source = "ds3", p += properties(row) ;
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step | 139

--- Page 152 ---
1 LOAD CSV reads all fields until coerced to other types.
The most obvious difference between the nodes generated from the different files is
the level of detail in the customer’s date of birth information. While nodes from data
set 1 include a year of birth (yob) property with a four-digit string representation
of the year,1 nodes from data set 2 will have a string property called age with a
representation of the current age of the customer, and nodes from data set 3 will
have a dob property with a string containing the customer’s complete date of birth.
To make these pieces of information comparable for the entity matching phase, the
lowest common denominator in terms of information is the year of birth.
The Cypher script in Example 9-4 shows how to create a new property called m_yob
(for matching year of birth) of type integer in all nodes. Notice how the source
property is used to determine the type of transformation logic to be applied in each
case, and number-casting functions, date functions, and arithmetic operators are used
on the original data.
Example 9-4. Normalizing dates in personal data files
MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.source = "ds1" SET p.m_yob = toInteger(p.yob) ;
MATCH (p:Person)
WHERE p.source = "ds2" SET p.m_yob = date().year - toInteger(p.age) ;
MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.source = "ds3" SET p.m_yob = date(p.dob).year ;
The name element also needs alignment, as each data set uses a different way to store
names. You can see separate fields for first and last name, CSVs, and a single string
containing the full name. The Cypher script in Example 9-5 creates a new property
called m_fullname (for matching full name) in all nodes with type string and a
“canonical” representation of a customer name: firstname lastname. The script uses
the source property to apply the relevant logic implemented by using string functions
(trim,toLower and tokenizer split).
Example 9-5. Normalizing names in personal data files
MATCH (p:Person)
WHERE p.source = "ds1" SET p.m_fullname = toLower(trim(p.full_name)) ;
MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.source = "ds2"
WITH p, split(p.name,",") AS parts
SET p.m_fullname = toLower(trim(parts[1]) + ' ' + trim(parts[0]));
MATCH (p:Person) WHERE p.source = "ds3"
SET p.m_fullname = toLower(trim(p.first_name) + ' ' + trim(p.last_name)) ;
140 | Chapter 9: Identity Knowledge Graphs

--- Page 153 ---
Once the graph data has been harmonized and normalized, it is ready for the applica‐
tion of the matching rules.
Blocking Keys
Optionally, the data preparation phase may include the generation of blocking keys.
Blocking is a technique to reduce the search space and so improve performance.
When looking for duplicates, you will need to compare every record to every other
record requiring n2 operations for n elements.
To reduce this to a more manageable computational workload, you need to avoid
comparing pairs that are not likely to produce matches. This is the job of the blocking
keys.
Only candidates with the same blocking key are compared with each other. Some‐
times features in the data can be used as blocking keys. For instance, you could use
postal codes and then only compare records representing entities within a reasonable
proximity.
Where “natural” blocking keys don’t exist, you can still generate them synthetically,
including using algorithms or ML models to suggest them.
Entity Matching
Matching is the central activity in the entity resolution process, where the identity
logic is applied. You will define when two entities are considered to be the same,
based on your business heuristics. This is done through the application of a set of
rules based on the features identified and prepared in the preparation phase. These
rules can vary in complexity but generally will be based on exact matches (useful
for strong identifiers), will approximate matches based on a definition of distance
(numeric, dates, embeddings), and may also introduce elements of fuzziness (string
similarity, value approximation, etc.). Some rules will give unambiguous matches
(e.g., a strong identifier) while others will provide weightings for probabilistic
scoring.
The following algorithm provides a systematic approach to applying the matching
rules:
1. Create a SAME_AS relationship between nodes for which there is a match on a1.
strong identifier feature.
2. Create a weighted SIMILAR relationship between nodes for which there is a match2.
above threshold on a weak identifier feature and a SAME_AS relationship does not
exist between the two nodes.
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step | 141

--- Page 154 ---
3. Discard the SIMILAR relationships for which there is a mismatch in one of the3.
strong identifier features. The weight in the relationship will be the similarity
score.
4. Apply a correcting factor to the weight in a SIMILAR relationship when there is a4.
match above threshold on a nonidentifying feature.
5. Discard the SIMILAR relationships with a similarity score below a minimum5.
threshold.
The application of these rules generates a graph of related nodes connected through
SAME_AS and SIMILAR relationships in which connected nodes will identify unique
entities. These four steps implicitly define three types of features: strong identifiers,
weak identifiers, and nonidentifying features.
In Example 9-6, the two strong identifiers in the data set are the passport number
(passport_no) and the Social Security number (ssn). The application of step 1 will
instantiate a relationship of type SAME_AS between any pair of Person nodes that share
the same value for either of the two strong identifiers.
Note the introduction of the filter on id(p1) > id(p2), avoiding the comparison
of p1 versus p2 and then the superfluous p2 versus p1. This is because the SAME_AS
relationship is symmetrical (if p1 is the same as p2, then p2 is the same as p1), so there
is no need to compare them in both directions and create two SAME_AS relationships
between the nodes.
Example 9-6. Creating SAME_AS relationships between nodes matching on strong IDs
MATCH (p1:Person), (p2:Person)
WHERE p1.source <> p2.source
AND (p1.ssn = p2.ssn OR p1.passport_no = p2.passport_no)
AND id(p1) > id(p2)
CREATE (p1)-[:SAME_AS { ssn_match : p1.ssn = p2.ssn,
passport_match : p1.passport_no =
p2.passport_no}]->(p2)
The script in Example 9-7 shows an implementation of step 2, taking care of the
weak identifiers. The m_fullname property is a weak identifier that was created by
amalgamating data across sources and by standardizing all name information avail‐
able. Normally, a match on the name is not sufficient to derive that two persons are
the same. That’s why it is treated as a secondary identifier, and a SIMILAR relationship
is created only when a match above threshold is found. In Example 9-7, one standard
string similarity metric called Jaro–Winkler distance is used, and when that metric is
below 0.2 (depending on the use case), the relationship is created and annotated with
a similarity metric.
142 | Chapter 9: Identity Knowledge Graphs

--- Page 155 ---
Example 9-7. Creating similar relationships between nodes matching on weak IDs
MATCH (p1:Person), (p2:Person)
WHERE NOT (p1)-[:SAME_AS]-(p2)
AND p1.source <> p2.source
AND id(p1) > id(p2)
AND apoc.text.jaroWinklerDistance(p1.m_fullname, p2.m_fullname) < 0.2
CREATE (p1)-[:SIMILAR { sim_score : 1 -
apoc.text.jaroWinklerDistance(p1.m_fullname, p2.m_fullname)}]->(p2)
In Example 9-7 the metric is inverted because it measures distance instead of similar‐
ity, so to trigger the creation of the relationship, the actual value needs to be under a
given distance value instead of over threshold as stated earlier.
The similarity score (sim_score) used to qualify the SIMILAR relationship is created
by subtracting the Jaro–Winkler distance from 1. It is important to keep consistent
semantics in the score used in this metric to make them comparable and composable
later on. The script in Example 9-7 sets a score between 0 and 1.0. The higher the
score, the stronger the similarity.
Step 3 is about filtering detected similarities based on weak identifiers (those materi‐
alized by SIMILAR relationships) by discarding the ones that exist between entities
with discrepancies in the strong identifier features. This is what the Cypher script in
Example 9-8 implements.
Example 9-8. Removing similar relationships between nodes matching on weak IDs
when they differ on strong ones
MATCH (p1:Person)-[sim:SIMILAR]->(p2:Person)
WHERE p1.ssn <> p2.ssn OR p1.passport_no <> p2.passport_no
DELETE sim
Step 4 applies a correcting factor to the weights in the SIMILAR relationships. The
code in Example 9-9 provides an example of this. For every pair of nodes at both
ends of a SIMILAR relationship, if there is a reasonable similarity on the year of
birth (m_yob, a nonidentifying feature in this case), then the similarity score will be
adjusted up or down.
The logic in steps 3 and 4 can also be implemented together with
step 2 and, in some cases, achieve an improvement in performance
by running a single pass on the data. The disadvantage would be
the lack of detailed traceability of the effect of each step. In this
chapter, the steps are separated for clarity.
The logic in Example 9-9 is based on an absolute threshold (abs(p1.m_yob -
p2.m_yob) > $yob_threshold). If the years of birth are not too dissimilar, the
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step | 143

--- Page 156 ---
similarity score is increased by 10%, but if the difference is too significant, then the
score is decreased by 10%. The adjustment function can be as sophisticated as you
need for your use case.
Example 9-9. Boosting or damping similar relationships between nodes matching on
weak IDs when they differ on other features
MATCH (p1:Person)-[sim:SIMILAR]->(p2:Person)
WITH sim, abs(p1.m_yob - p2.m_yob) AS yob_diff
SET sim.sim_score = sim.sim_score * CASE WHEN yob_diff > $yob_threshold
THEN .9 ELSE 1.1 END
Step 5 removes the SIMILAR relationships that, after applying the correcting factor in
the previous step, would result in a similarity score below acceptable. The code in
Example 9-10 shows how this can be implemented straightforwardly using Cypher.
Example 9-10. Removing similar relationships between nodes matching on weak IDs
when below minimum score
MATCH (p1:Person)-[sim:SIMILAR]->(p2:Person)
WHERE sim.sim_score < $sim_score_threshold
DELETE sim
The result of processing all five steps produces the graph in Figure 9-1.
Figure 9-1. Graph result of applying the matching rules
It’s worth mentioning that after the application of step 2, additional SIMILAR relation‐
ships were created, which were subsequently removed when executing step 3—for
example, the nodes representing the individuals named Husein Sprull and Hana
Sprull. On execution of step 2, a relationship would be created based on the similarity
in their names, which would later be removed in step 3 due to the mismatch in their
Social Security numbers. This process is shown in Figure 9-2.
144 | Chapter 9: Identity Knowledge Graphs

--- Page 157 ---
Figure 9-2. Relationship of type SIMILAR added and subsequently removed
In the next section, the graph in Figure 9-1 will be analyzed topologically to identify
related entities.
Build/Update a Persisted Record of Master Entities
Once the set of related entities has been determined and the relationships made
explicit in the graph, the final step is to create a persisted representation of what’s
typically called master entities. Essentially, this means detecting sets of connected
nodes in the graph either through SAME_AS or SIMILAR relationships resulting from
applying the matching rules.
All nodes in a set form a connected component and are equivalent to a unique entity.
Detecting such sets is what the Weakly Connected Components (WCC) algorithm
does. The adjective weakly comes from the fact that the algorithm works on undirec‐
ted graphs. This nicely fits the objective of this exercise because the direction of both
SAME_AS and SIMILAR relationships is irrelevant, as both are symmetric.
You can see how this can be implemented using the concepts from Chapter 6. A
prerequisite to the application of any algorithm is the creation of an in-memory
projection of the subgraph to be used. This is what the code in Example 9-11 does.
Example 9-11. Creating a projection on person nodes and SIMILAR and SAME_AS
relationships
CALL gds.graph.project(
'identity-wcc',
'Person',
['SAME_AS','SIMILAR']
)
Graph-Based Entity Resolution Step by Step | 145

========================================================
BOOK: The Practitioners Guide to Graph Data.pdf
========================================================

### RANGE: Naming Mistakes (Pages 109-119) ###

--- Page 109 ---
Rule of Thumb #6
If you need to use data to subselect a group, make it a property.
Ordering transactions by time requires us to have that value stored in our graph
model: enter properties. This is a great use of a property on the transaction vertex so
that we can subselect those vertices in our model. Figure 4-6 shows how we would
add time into our ongoing example.
Figure 4-6. Modeling time as a property on the transaction vertex so that we can subse‐
lect to query for only the most recent transactions
Together, tips #1–6 give you a great starting point for identifying what will be a ver‐
tex, an edge, or a property in your graph data model. We have one last section of data
modeling best practices to consider before we start the implementation details for this
chapter.
A Graph Has No Name: Common Mistakes in Naming
The callouts in the upcoming section are common mistakes. Each mistake is followed
by our bad-better-best recommendations.
Arriving at a consensus on what something should be named and maintained with
your codebase is surprisingly difficult. We have three topics on which teams com‐
monly waste their valuable time in bikeshedding how to address naming conventions
in their graph data model.
Pitfalls in Naming Conventions #1
Using the word has as an edge label.
One of the most common mistakes we see comes from naming all of your edges with
the label has, as shown on the left side of Figure 4-7. This is a mistake in naming
because the word has does not provide meaningful context regarding the edge’s pur‐
pose or direction.
Graph Data Modeling 101 | 89

--- Page 110 ---
Figure 4-7. From left to right: the bad, better, and recommended ways to name your
edges
If your graph model uses has for its edge labels, we have two recommendations for
you. A better edge label would have the form has_{vertex_label}, as shown in the
center in orange in Figure 4-7. This type of name allows you to have more specificity
in your graph queries while also providing a more meaningful name to maintain in
your codebase.
The preferred solution to this problem is shown in green at far right in Figure 4-7.
This recommendation advises you to use an active verb that communicates meaning,
direction, and specificity to your data. We are going to use the edge labels deposit_to
and withdraw_from to connect transactions to the accounts in our examples.
After meaningful edge labels have been selected, it is also a common mistake to create
property names that do not help uniquely identify your data. This brings us to our
next pitfall in property graph modeling.
Pitfalls in Naming Conventions #2
Using the word id as a property.
The concept of which pieces of data uniquely identify an entity is a deep topic. Using
a property key called id is a bad decision because it is not descriptive of what it is
referring to. Additionally, id is a naming clash with the internal naming conventions
within Apache Cassandra and is not supported in DataStax Graph.
A slightly better convention would be to name the property that uniquely identifies
your data with {vertex_label}_id, as shown at center in Figure 4-8. We use this a
few times throughout the book because we are working with synthetic examples, and
this type of identifier is perfectly fine if you use randomly generated identifiers, like
UUIDs (universally unique identifiers). However, you will see us move to using more
descriptive identifiers when we work with open source data. These identifiers repre‐
sent concepts that uniquely identify entities within their domain, such as social secu‐
rity numbers, public keys, and domain-specific universally unique identifiers.
90 | Chapter 4: Exploring Neighborhoods in Development

--- Page 111 ---
Figure 4-8. From left to right, the bad, better, and recommended ways to name a prop‐
erty to uniquely identify your data.
This brings us to the last and debatably most important mistake that we see through‐
out application codebases.
Pitfalls in Naming Conventions #3
Inconsistent use of casing.
When it comes to casing, the best approach follows the language conventions that
you are writing in. Some languages have style guides that promote CamelCase,
whereas others prefer snake_case. For the examples in this book, we plan to follow
the following casing and styles:
1. Capital CamelCase for vertex labels
2. Lowercase snake_case for edge labels, property keys, and example data
This last tip feels a bit pedantic to even bring up in a graph book. We are mentioning
it because consistency in naming conventions tends to be forgotten, creating expen‐
sive roadblocks for teams during the last stretch of getting their graph technology
into production. The more trivial these tips seem to your team, the better off you
probably already are in making sure to remember them.
Our Full Development Graph Model
The previous discussion of graph data modeling illustrated how we broke down our
first query to evolve the example from Chapter 3. In this section, we want to build up
the remaining elements in our data model to answer all the questions for this chap‐
ter’s example.
Graph Data Modeling 101 | 91

--- Page 112 ---
The example in this chapter adds schema and data that enable our application to
answer the following three questions:
1. What are the most recent 20 transactions involving Michael’s account?
2. In December, at which vendors did Michael shop, and with what frequency?
3. Find and update the transactions that Jamie and Aaliyah most value: their pay‐
ments from their account to their mortgage loan.
We have already stepped through how to model the first question. Let’s take a closer
look at it.
Figure 4-9. The augmented graph schema from Chapter 3 that applies the data modeling
principles to answer the first query of our expanded example
The graph schema in Figure 4-9 applies the principles we built up to answer the first
question into a graph data model. The new vertex label is Transaction, with two new
edge labels to the Account vertex: withdraw_from and deposit_to, respectively. We
discussed how and where to model time in our graph, which you see in Figure 4-9
with timestamp on the Transaction vertex.
Next, let’s consider this chapter’s remaining questions for our example in this chapter
by modeling the queries:
92 | Chapter 4: Exploring Neighborhoods in Development

--- Page 113 ---
1. In December, at which vendors did Michael shop, and with what frequency?
2. Find and update the transactions that Jamie and Aaliyah most value:
their payments from their account to their mortgage loan.
To arrive at a data model for these questions, let’s apply the thought processes we
introduced in “Graph Data Modeling 101” on page 82. Following the advice there, we
came up with three statements about transactions:
1. Transactions charge credit cards.
2. Transactions pay vendors.
3. Transactions pay loans.
From these statements, we can find the rest of our required schema elements. First,
we need a new vertex label to represent where our customers shop: Vendor. Next, we
need an edge label, pay, for a transaction to the Loan or Vendor vertex labels. Last, we
need another edge label, charge, to indicate that a transaction charges a credit card.
Bringing all of this together, we have the schema shown in Figure 4-10.
Figure 4-10. The development schema that answers all of the queries we aim to build for
this example
Before We Start Building
We reduced the full perspective on graph data modeling to include only the practices
that we need for our current example. Beyond these core principles, you will find
Graph Data Modeling 101 | 93

--- Page 114 ---
edge cases about your data that are not covered here. That is expected. We are teach‐
ing a thought process and selected the principles here as a starting guide for modeling
your data like a graph.
If we could ensure you understood one concept about graph data
modeling, it would be the following: modeling your data as a graph
is just as much of an art as it is engineering. The art of the data
modeling process involves creating and evolving your perspective
on your data. This evolution translates your mindset into the para‐
digm of relationship-first data modeling.
When you find new modeling cases in this book or in your own work, ask the follow‐
ing questions about what you are modeling to help develop your own reasoning:
1. What does this concept mean to the end user of the application?
2. How are you going to read this data in your application?
Defining your data model is the first step in applying graph thinking to your applica‐
tion. Focus on the data you can integrate, the queries you want to ask, and what this
will mean to your end user. When combined, those three concepts articulate how we
see, model, and use graph data within an application.
Our Thoughts on the Importance of Data, Queries, and the End User
To help you learn and apply our perspective to building your own graph model, let’s
walk through the importance of data, queries, and the end user.
Our first piece of advice is to focus on the data you have. It is easy to boil the ocean by
modeling your industry’s entire graph problem; avoid this rabbit hole! Your graph
model will evolve if you keep centered on getting to production with the data with
which your application will be working.
Second, apply the practice of query-driven design. Build your data model to accom‐
modate only a predefined set of graph queries. A common red herring we run into on
this topic is those applications that aim to create open traversals across any discovera‐
ble data in a graph. For developmental purposes, the ability to explore and discover
makes sense. However, for production use, an application with open traversal access
can introduce a myriad of concerns.
For security, performance, and maintenance implications, we strongly advise teams
not to create production platforms with unbounded and unlimited traversals. The
warning sign we see is a lack of specificity for your graph application. We know this
perspective is very hard to apply when you are first exploring graph data. We see the
94 | Chapter 4: Exploring Neighborhoods in Development

--- Page 115 ---
line here as setting expectations between what you want to do during development
versus what you want to push to production in a distributed production application.
Last and most importantly, you have to consider what the data means to your end
user. Everything from selecting naming conventions to the objects in your graph will
be interpreted by someone else: your team members or your application users.
Naming conventions and graph objects are interpreted and maintained by your engi‐
neering team members; choose them wisely.
Ultimately, your graph data will be presented to an end user through your applica‐
tion. Spend time designing your data architecture, models, and queries to present
information that is most meaningful to them.
When combined, these three concepts articulate how we see, model, and use graph
data within an application. Again, the three concepts are to build with the data you
have, follow query-driven design, and design for your end user. Following these
design principles will help get you unstuck during those difficult data modeling dis‐
cussions and prepare your application to be the best use of graph data the industry
has ever seen.
Implementation Details for Exploring Neighborhoods in
Development
Our schema from Figure 4-10 requires only two new vertex labels: Transaction and
Vendor. What you have practiced a few times prior to now is how to take a schema
drawing and translate it into code. We showed the schema in Figure 4-10, and in
Example 4-1 we show you the code.
Example 4-1.
schema.vertexLabel("Transaction").
ifNotExists().
partitionBy("transaction_id", Int).
property("transaction_type", Text).
property("timestamp", Text).
create();
schema.vertexLabel("Vendor").
ifNotExists().
partitionBy("vendor_id", Int).
property("vendor_name", Text).
create();
Implementation Details for Exploring Neighborhoods in Development | 95

--- Page 116 ---
In case you are wondering, we are using Text as the data type for
timestamp to make it easier to teach concepts in our upcoming
examples. We will be using the ISO 8601 standard format stored as
text.
In addition to these vertex labels, we added relationships between the Transaction
vertex and the other vertex labels in this graph. Let’s start with the new edge labels
between the Transaction and Account vertex labels. The schema code for the new
edge labels is shown in Example 4-2.
Example 4-2.
schema.edgeLabel("withdraw_from").
ifNotExists().
from("Transaction").
to("Account").
create();
schema.edgeLabel("deposit_to").
ifNotExists().
from("Transaction").
to("Account").
create();
These two edges model how money moves to and from an account within your bank.
In Example 4-3, we add in the rest of the edge labels in our example:
Example 4-3.
schema.edgeLabel("pay").
ifNotExists().
from("Transaction").
to("Loan").
create();
schema.edgeLabel("charge").
ifNotExists().
from("Transaction").
to("CreditCard").
create();
schema.edgeLabel("pay").
ifNotExists().
from("Transaction").
to("Vendor").
create();
96 | Chapter 4: Exploring Neighborhoods in Development

--- Page 117 ---
These last three edge labels complete the edges we will need to describe transactions
between the assets in our example.
Generating More Data for Our Expanded Example
As examples grow, so too does the data. We wrote a small data generator to expand
the data from Chapter 3 to include our data model from Figure 4-10. If you are inter‐
ested in the data generation process for this chapter, you have two options.
Your first option is to use the bash scripts to reload the exact same data you will see in
the upcoming examples. We will teach you about this tool and process in Chapter 5,
but you are welcome to preview the loading script in the GitHub repository. We rec‐
ommend using the scripts throughout this book if you would like the examples you
are running locally to match the results we show in the text.
Your second option is to dive into and execute our data generation code. We provided
our code in a separate Studio Notebook called Ch4_DataGeneration. We recommend
this option if you want to dig into creating fake data with Gremlin and the methods
we used.
An Important Warning About the Data Generation Process
If you rerun the data insertion process in your Studio Notebook,
the results in your local graph will not precisely match the results
printed in this text. If you want the data to match precisely, we rec‐
ommend importing the exact same graph structure via DataStax
Bulk Loader. You will find all of this in the accompanying technical
materials.
Up to this point, we have accomplished many tasks. We explored our first set of data
modeling tips, created a development model, looked at the schema code, and inserted
data.
The last main task is to use the Gremlin query language to walk around our model
and answer questions about our data.
Basic Gremlin Navigation
The main objective of this chapter is to illustrate a real-world graph schema that
walks through multiple neighborhoods of graph data.
For your reference, we will use the words walk, navigate, and tra‐
verse interchangeably throughout this book to mean that we are
writing graph queries.
Basic Gremlin Navigation | 97

--- Page 118 ---
Everything in this chapter up until now was required to set up answering the follow‐
ing three questions in this section:
1. What are the most recent 20 transactions involving Michael’s account?
2. In December, at which vendors did Michael shop, and with what frequency?
3. Find and update the transactions that Jamie and Aaliyah most value: their pay‐
ments from their account to their mortgage loan.
Let’s walk through the queries and their results. Then, in the chapter’s final section on
Advanced Gremlin, we will delve a bit deeper into how to shape the result payload.
Our recommendation is that you find a way to reference Figure 4-10 as you practice
the queries in the upcoming sections. We recommend doing this because your
schema functions as your map; you need to know where you are so that you can walk
in the right direction to your destination.
Query 1: What are the most recent 20 transactions involving Michael’s account?
Let’s start with some pseudocode in Example 4-4 to think about how we are going to
walk through our data to answer this first question.
Example 4-4.
Question: What are the most recent 20 transactions involving Michael's account?
Process:
Start at Michael's customer vertex
Walk to his account
Walk to all transactions
Sort them by time, descending
Return the top 20 transaction ids
We used the process outlined in Example 4-4 to create the Gremlin query in
Example 4-5.
Example 4-5.
1 dev.V().has("Customer", "customer_id", "customer_0"). // the customer
2 out("owns"). // walk to his account
3 in("withdraw_from", "deposit_to"). // walk to all transactions
4 order(). // sort the vertices
5 by("timestamp", desc). // by their timestamp, descending
6 limit(20). // filter to only the 20 most recent
7 values("transaction_id") // return the transaction_ids
A sample of the results:
"184", "244", "268", ...
98 | Chapter 4: Exploring Neighborhoods in Development

--- Page 119 ---
Let’s dig into this query one step at a time.
On line 1, dev.V().has("Customer", "customer_id", "customer_0") looks up a
vertex according to its unique identifier. Then on line 2, the step out("owns") walks
through the outgoing owns edge to the Account vertices for this customer. In this
case, Michael has only one account.
At this point, we want to access all transactions. On line 3, the in("withdraw_from",
"deposit_to") step does just that: we walk through the incoming edge labels to
access transactions. At line 4, we are on the transaction vertices.
We left a detail out of “An evolution of modeling transactions in a
graph” on page 86 that we want to bring up now. The simplicity of
line 3 in Example 4-5 was also part of the motivation that led to
how we designed the edges in our data model. This first query was
much harder to write and reason about when the edges were going
in different directions.
The order() step on line 4 indicates that we need to provide some sort of order to the
vertices, which are transactions. We specify the sort order on line 5 with the by("time
stamp", desc) step. This means that we are going to access, merge, and sort all
Transaction vertices according to their timestamp. Then we want to select only the
20 most recent vertices with limit(20). Last, on line 7, we want to get access to the
transaction_ids, so we select them via the values("transaction_id") step.
This query will return a list of values that contains the transaction_id for each of
the 20 most recent transactions across all of the customer’s accounts.
Imagine how much more powerful this would be to display for the end user. They
would be able to see the details that are most relevant to them instead of navigating
multiple screens to join this data together in their head. This type of query is vital in
understanding how to personalize your application to what a customer most cares
about.
Query 2: In December 2020, at which vendors did Michael shop, and with what frequency?
For this second question, let’s start with an outline of the query in Example 4-6 to
think about how we are going to walk through our data to answer the question.
Basic Gremlin Navigation | 99

### RANGE: Primary Keys (Pages 140-146) ###

--- Page 140 ---
Working with Graph Data in Apache Cassandra
This section looks at the fundamental concepts of working with graph data structures
in Apache Cassandra: primary keys, partition keys, clustering columns, and material‐
ized views.
We are going to discuss these Cassandra data modeling topics from a graph user’s
perspective.
First, we will talk about what you need to know about vertices, and then we will go
over what you need to know about edges. For vertices, you need to know about pri‐
mary keys and partition keys. For edges, you need to know about clustering columns
and materialized views.
Let’s get started with the concept that connects everything: the primary key.
The Most Important Topic to Understand About Data Modeling:
Primary Keys
A major challenge of building a good data model within a distributed system is deter‐
mining how to uniquely identify your data with primary keys.
You have already worked with one of the simplest forms of a primary key: the parti‐
tion key.
Partition key
The partition key is the first element of a primary key in Apache Cassandra. The
partition key is the part of the primary key that identifies the location of the data
in a distributed environment.
From a user’s perspective, the entire primary key is required for you to access your
data from the system. The partition key is just the first piece of the primary key.
Primary key
The primary key describes a unique piece of data in the system. In DataStax
Graph, a primary key can be made up of one or more properties.
You have already been using and working with primary and partition keys. In Data‐
Stax Graph, you specify the desired primary key in the schema API. We saw the sim‐
plest version of a primary key—just one partition key—in the previous chapter with:
schema.vertexLabel("Customer").
ifNotExists().
partitionBy("customer_id", Text). // basic primary key: one partition key
property("name", Text).
create();
120 | Chapter 5: Exploring Neighborhoods in Production

--- Page 141 ---
The partitionBy() method indicates the value that will be included in the label’s
partition key. In this case, we have only one value, customer_id. This means that cus
tomer_id is the full primary key and partition key for the Customer vertex.
From a developer’s perspective, this decision has three consequences for your appli‐
cation. First, the value for customer_id uniquely identifies the data. Second, your
application will need the value for customer_id to read the data about the customer.
We will cover the third point in a moment.
These two consequences govern how you, the user, design your data’s primary and
partition keys. Let’s take a look at an example. Previously, you used your primary key
to look up this data in Gremlin via:
g.V().has("Customer", "customer_id", "customer_0").
elementMap()
This returns:
{
"id": "dseg:/Customer/customer_0",
"label": "Customer",
"name": "Michael",
"customer_id": "customer_0"
}
Looking up vertices or edges by their full primary key is the fastest way to read data
in DataStax Graph. This is one of the main reasons that selecting a good partition and
primary key for your data is so important.
There is a third consequence of the partition key in Apache Cassandra. A vertex
label’s partition key assigns your graph data to a host within a distributed environ‐
ment. Partition keys also give you different ways you can colocate your graph data.
Let’s dig into the details.
Partition Keys and Data Locality in a Distributed Environment
We recommend this section if you like getting deep in the weeds.
This section aims to synthesize topics across the Cassandra and graph communities.
We will explore some hypothetical alternatives to graph partitioning by examining
different partition key choices to colocate graph data. We will conclude with the par‐
tition strategy we started with for our example, but you will have gained a better
understanding of the effects of partition key design and the graph partitioning prob‐
lem.
And we need to be pedantic about what we really mean for a brief moment.
The word partition means two very different things to two different groups of people.
The Cassandra community’s understanding of partition answers the question,
Working with Graph Data in Apache Cassandra | 121

--- Page 142 ---
“Where is my data in my cluster?” The graph community’s understanding of the term
answers the question, “How can I organize my graph data into a smaller group to
minimize an invariant?”
This book applies the Cassandra community’s definition of partitioning to working
with graph data. When we refer to a partition, we are referencing data locality, or on
which server your data is written to disk across your distributed system.
To illustrate how we will be using the idea of partitioning, let’s recall some data for
our current example, as shown in Figure 5-2.
Figure 5-2. Sample data for three customers in our C360 example
To visualize data assignment to a server (also referred to as an instance or a node) in a
cluster, imagine you are working with a cluster of four servers running DataStax
Graph in Apache Cassandra. In Figure 5-3, we represent a distributed cluster with a
circle that has four servers running Cassandra. (Each eye in Figure 5-3 represents
DataStax Graph in Cassandra.) Then, we show where your graph data is written to
disk by illustrating the graph data next to the server around your cluster, as we do in
Figure 5-3.
The largest circle in Figure 5-3 represents a cluster of four servers, each indicated
with the Cassandra eye logo, running DataStax Graph in Apache Cassandra. The
sample data from Figure 5-2 is shown next to the server in which the data is physi‐
cally stored. In Apache Cassandra, data is mapped to a specific server in your cluster
according to its partition key.
122 | Chapter 5: Exploring Neighborhoods in Production

--- Page 143 ---
Figure 5-3. Illustrating which server (node) each vertex is stored in a distributed cluster;
the circle with four eyes represents a distributed cluster
In Figure 5-3, you see that the data for customer_0 is mapped to four different
machines. The customer vertex is written to server 1, the loan vertex is on server 2,
the account vertex is written to machine 3, and the credit card vertex is on machine 0.
You can think of partition keys and their association to data locality in a distributed
environment as follows: data with the same partition key is stored on the same
machine, and data with different keys may be stored on different machines.
Partitioning graph data according to access pattern
With graph data, there are strategies for designing your partition keys to minimize
the latency of your graph traversals. Different partitioning strategies affect the coloca‐
tion of your data and, therefore, the latency of your query.
To minimize jumping around machines in your cluster when you are processing your
graph data, you may consider a partitioning strategy that keeps all the data related to
your query within the same partition. To illustrate this idea, Figure 5-4 shows a parti‐
tioning strategy optimized for the expected access pattern of a C360 application. The
partitions are defined according to the individual customer and their data because a
C360 query will typically be looking for an individual and their associated data. For
our sample data, we would create a partition for each individual.
Working with Graph Data in Apache Cassandra | 123

--- Page 144 ---
Figure 5-4. Partitioning graph data in a distributed system according to access pattern
If you have a background in graph theory, the partitioning strategy
illustrated in Figure 5-4 is similar to partitioning according to con‐
nected components.
If you have a background in working with Apache Cassandra, the
partitioning strategy illustrated in Figure 5-4 follows the same
practice of partitioning according to access pattern.
To implement the partitioning strategy illustrated in Figure 5-4, you would need to
add the customer’s unique identifier as the partition key for every vertex label. In
your schema code, we implement the partitioning strategy with:
schema.vertexLabel("Account").
ifNotExists().
partitionBy("customer_id", Text).
clusterBy("acct_id", Text). // to be defined in a coming section
property("name", Text).
create();
It is useful to consider this partitioning strategy because it minimizes the latency of
your query. All the data for your customer-centric query is colocated on the same
node in your environment. This is an optimization at the physical data layer that will
be advantageous when you query your data.
However, there are two reasons why this type of partition strategy will not be recom‐
mended for the queries we are exploring for our example. Recall that the full primary
key is required to start your graph query. The first downside to the design shown in
Figure 5-4 is that you will need to know the customer’s identifier to start your graph
traversal at an account.
Applying this to our example of a shared account, acct_14, brings us to another
drawback to using this partition strategy. This schema design will create two vertices
about acct_14 that are adjacent to two different people. This means that you won’t be
able to start at acct_14 and find all customers who own that account. This has impli‐
cations for your graph query.
124 | Chapter 5: Exploring Neighborhoods in Production

--- Page 145 ---
For the C360 queries we are exploring in this example, the partition strategy from
Figure 5-4 doesn’t make sense. When we talk about trees in an upcoming example,
however, it makes sense to consider data model optimizations to minimize query
latency.
Partitioning according to unique key
Let’s look at a second strategy and compare it to colocating data according to your
application’s access pattern.
Think back to the full schema for our example and recall that each vertex label had a
single, unique partition key. You can think of this as separating your graph data via
the most granular division possible: the data’s most unique value.
Figure 5-5. A visual example of the different partitions within your graph data according
to the vertex label’s partition key
The graph data in Figure 5-5 would distribute the vertices across your cluster accord‐
ing to the partition key’s value. Essentially, each vertex will be mapped to a different
partition because each partition key’s value is unique.
One of the drawbacks to partitioning your vertices according to a unique key is that
any time you need to walk through your data, you will be jumping between machines
across your distributed environment. The purpose of using graph data in your appli‐
cation is to use the connections and relationships in your data. If you structure your
graph data across a distributed environment according to unique identifiers, that also
means that you will (likely) be switching servers each time you need to access con‐
nected data.
Final thoughts on partitioning strategies
There are benefits and drawbacks to the different strategies for partitioning graph
data in a distributed environment. Partitioning your graph data according to access
pattern creates limitations on how you can walk through connected data. On the
other hand, this strategy minimizes traversal latency by colocating large components
of data onto the same node.
Working with Graph Data in Apache Cassandra | 125

--- Page 146 ---
The most common way to partition your graph data is by the data’s unique identifier.
This makes it easiest to plan for query flexibility but does also introduce latency to
your queries due to the distributed nature of your graph. This is the approach we will
use for our C360 example.
The only way to understand the implications of any partition strategy is to calculate
what it would look like for your data and queries. This requires a balance between
understanding the distributions of the data for the application you need to build
today and considering the future scope toward which you are building.
Selecting a good partitioning strategy is more complicated when we
are working with graph data. Partitioning graph data around a dis‐
tributed environment is synonymous with breaking up your graph
data into different sections. Optimizing which data belongs to a
particular section is classified as one of the hardest types of prob‐
lems in computer science: an NP-complete problem. While maybe
not the best news, this helps to explain why using graph technolo‐
gies in a distributed environment isn’t as simple as translating an
entity-relationship diagram into a graph data model.
On the topic of partitioning, there are two main takeaways to restate here: uniqueness
and locality. In DataStax Graph, your data’s primary key is its unique identifier. For
the fastest performance, you start your graph queries by data via its full primary key.
The second thing to note is that your data’s partition key determines its locality in
your cluster. This governs which machines in your cluster will store the data and the
colocation of other data alongside it.
Given uniqueness and locality with partition keys, let’s take a look at how edges are
represented in Apache Cassandra.
Understanding Edges, Part 1: Edges in Adjacency Lists
Diving into the world of graph modeling brings a large wave of terms, concepts, and
thinking patterns. Now that we have the basics covered, let’s take a look at how graph
data, namely the edges, can be represented on disk or in memory.
There are three main data structures for representing edges in data:
Edge list
An edge list is a list of pairs in which every pair contains two adjacent vertices.
The first element in the pair is the source (from) vertex, and the second element
is the destination (to) vertex.
126 | Chapter 5: Exploring Neighborhoods in Production

### RANGE: Path Concepts (Pages 249-256) ###

--- Page 249 ---
Figure 8-3. An example of analyzing paths to determine an optimal route for a logistics
company
Figure 8-3 depicts how a package travels from a warehouse to your home. You see
three potential paths, each with different combinations of length and types of trans‐
fer. Depending on a multitude of factors, one path in our logistics network may be
more trusted than another.
For example, if you are someone who watches your package’s path, you also feel the
effect of route optimization for shipping. The more stops you see your package take,
the lower your trust in its on-time arrival.
Route optimization is one of the most popular uses of graphs in computer science.
Whether you are making decisions for personal travel or waiting for a package, the
most trusted solutions seek the shortest path through the data.
It is the trust in the path between the source and the destination that matters.
Quantifying trust between two concepts through understanding shared relationships
is (probably) the most relatable and approachable application of distributed graph
technology today.
Fundamental Concepts About Paths
Pathfinding queries are popular uses of graph technology when you do not know
exactly how to walk between vertices in your graph.
However, discovering paths throughout graph structure may become a double-edged
sword: on the one hand, pathfinding with graph technology will provide you with
Fundamental Concepts About Paths | 229

--- Page 250 ---
short and elegant solutions; on the other hand, naive pathfinding queries may quickly
get out of control.
Pathfinding questions are simple to ask but expensive to compute. This is where
things can get out of hand very quickly.
Let’s start by walking through the fundamental problem definitions for discovering
paths in graph structure.
Shortest Paths
In this chapter, we will introduce shortest paths according to a path’s distance.
Recall from Chapter 2 the definition of distance as the smallest number of edges it
takes to walk from one vertex to another. The shortest path problem is to find the path
with the smallest distance, or shortest walk, from one vertex to another in your graph.
Here are the four terms and their definitions that we will be applying throughout the
next two chapters.
Path
A path in a graph is a sequence of consecutive edges in a graph.
Length
The length of a path is the number of edges in the path.
Shortest path
The shortest path between two vertices is the path that connects the two vertices
and has the shortest length or distance.
Distance
The distance between two vertices in a graph is the number of edges in a shortest
path.
In Figure 8-4, there are three ways to walk from A to D:
1. A → D
2. A → C → D
3. A → B → C → D
The shortest path is the path with the smallest distance. That is the path from A to D,
which has a distance of 1. The other paths have distances of 2 and 3, respectively.
230 | Chapter 8: Finding Paths in Development

--- Page 251 ---
Figure 8-4. An example of the shortest path from A to D
There are three types of shortest path problems:
Shortest path
The goal of a shortest path problem is to discover the smallest distance walk from
A to B.
Single-source shortest path
The goal of a single-source shortest path problem is to discover the smallest-
distance walk from A to all other vertices in the graph.
All-pairs shortest path
The goal of an all-pairs shortest path problem is to discover the smallest-distance
walk between any two vertices in the graph.
These definitions give us a classification of the three types of path‐
finding problems that you may have run into or will run into. This
chapter focuses on solutions to the first type of problem: finding
the shortest path between two known points.
Any solution to a path problem relies on understanding how to procedurally walk
through graph data. Let’s dig into depth-first search (DFS) and breadth-first search
(BFS), two fundamental techniques for finding shortest paths.
Depth-first search
Depth-first search is an algorithm for traversing graph data structures. It explores
a path as deep as possible along each branch before backtracking.
Fundamental Concepts About Paths | 231

--- Page 252 ---
Breadth-First Search
Breadth-first search is an algorithm for traversing graph data structures. It
explores all of the neighbor vertices at the present depth prior to moving on to
the vertices at the next depth level.
You may be wondering: “Why do we need to go into DFS versus BFS?”
First, most engineers start their research about pathfinding by searching for informa‐
tion on a certain pathfinding algorithm. To us, that is a backwards approach. Second,
because paths are so natural to understand, it is easy to confuse the solution with the
underlying problem.
You first need to understand which path problem you are trying to solve before you
apply a certain algorithm.
Depth-First Search and Breadth-First Search
Depth-first search and breadth-first search are two of the most popular ways to illus‐
trate procedural visitation of graph-structured data. Diving deep into understanding
each technique gives you the foundation you need to explore the world of pathfind‐
ing algorithms, because at some level, all other solutions to pathfinding problems
build upon these two techniques.
The difference between the two approaches is easy to understand. Depth-first search
prioritizes exploring one path as deeply as you can before returning to a different
path. Breadth-first search prioritizes exploring all paths up to a certain distance
before moving deeper into the data.
Let’s take a look at these differences in Figure 8-5. As you walk through the figure, the
main idea is to consider the order in which a vertex is visited for each process; we call
this the visited set. We numerically label each vertex in Figure 8-5 with the order in
which it is visited (or reached) by each algorithm.
For each graph in Figure 8-5, the goal is to walk procedurally from the starting vertex
at the top to the end. The graph on the left shows the order in which every vertex is
visited according to DFS. Here, you see that each branch is explored until its end
before you return back to the top to select a different path. The graph on the right
shows the order in which every vertex is visited according to BFS. Here, you see that
each level or neighborhood is fully explored before you move deeper into the graph.
232 | Chapter 8: Finding Paths in Development

--- Page 253 ---
Figure 8-5. Illustrating the visited set for the two most common graph-searching
algorithms
The implementation details between DFS and BFS come down to which data struc‐
ture you use. DFS uses a last in, first out (LIFO) stack. You can remember this by vis‐
ualizing a stack. Stacks are typically thought of as vertical structures, just like how
DFS explores data deeply before going wide. BFS uses a first in, first out (FIFO)
queue. You can remember this by visualizing a queue. Queues are typically thought of
as horizontal structures, just like how BFS explores widely before going deep.
However long it takes you to think like a graph, it is vital that you understand the
runtime and overhead required to process your data. So keep practicing how to pro‐
cedurally think through how much data you need to visit during a traversal. From
there, you can quantify an expectation for how long a traversal or algorithm will run
or the overhead it requires for your data.
Learning to See Application Features as Different Path Problems
Think about the last time you used LinkedIn. You likely opened the LinkedIn applica‐
tion to search for someone else. When you found candidates, you received a metric
indicating how closely connected you were to each person in your search results. You
knew right away whether someone was a first-, second-, or third-degree connection.
Now think like an engineer working for LinkedIn.
In this scenario, you are designing the connected badge feature that you just used. It
is a requirement that any user of LinkedIn knows the distance from themselves to
Fundamental Concepts About Paths | 233

--- Page 254 ---
anyone else when they search. From there, you and your engineering team have a
long list of approaches to consider.
Do you precalculate all distance values for the connected badge by solving the all-
pairs shortest path problem for your graph? If you do, what happens when new con‐
nections are added to or removed from LinkedIn’s network?
What are the end user’s expectations for knowing their connectedness to another per‐
son? What requirements can you relax in order to prioritize speed of delivering the
information to the end user?
Though presented in the context of pathfinding at LinkedIn, all of these questions are
common considerations for any team wanting to use path distance in an application.
To answer any of those questions about your application’s design, you need to under‐
stand the performance implications of processing graph-structured data. And the
fundamental approach to walking through graph-structured data to solve problems at
LinkedIn scale builds procedures off of BFS or DFS.
We will be using these fundamental techniques in the coming sections as we explore
the example data and find paths of trust throughout it. To that end, let’s introduce the
data for this chapter’s example and apply shortest paths to our sample problem.
Finding Paths in a Trust Network
Distance between concepts quantifies trust.
To bring that axiom to life, our running example from now until the end of Chapter 9
dives into the world of Bitcoin. Exploring a network of trust between Bitcoin traders
creates an interesting intersection between paths in graph data and trust. Ironically,
the advent of Bitcoin centers on a distrust of centralized institutions.
In this section, we will introduce the data, walk through a brief primer on Bitcoin ter‐
minology, and develop our data model.
Source Data
We will be exploring a network of people who trade Bitcoin on the Bitcoin OTC
(Over The Counter) Marketplace. The Bitcoin OTC Marketplace allows its members
to rate how much they trust other members, and those ratings form who-trusts-
whom networks, which we will be using in the dataset. These ratings are given on a
scale of [–10, 10]. You will see the ratings in the details to come, but we won’t use
234 | Chapter 8: Finding Paths in Development

--- Page 255 ---
2 Kumar, Srijan, et al. “Edge Weight Prediction in Weighted Signed Networks,” in 2016 IEEE 16th International
Conference on Data Mining (ICDM), Barcelona, Spain, December 12–15, 2016 (Piscataway, NJ: Institute of
Electrical and Electronics Engineers, 2017), 221–30.
3 Srijan Kumar, Bryan Hooi, Disha Makhija, Mohit Kumar, Christos Faloutsos, and V.S. Subrahmanian, “REV2:
Fraudulent User Prediction in Rating Platforms,” in WSM ’18: Proceedings of the Eleventh ACM International
Conference on Web Search and Data Mining , Marina del Rey, California, February 5–9, 2018 (New York:
ACM, 2018), 333–41.
them in our queries until Chapter 9. The data comes from the research work of Srijan
Kumar et al. and can be found on the Stanford Network Analysis Platform.2 3
Stanford Network Analysis Platform (SNAP) is a general-purpose
network analysis and graph mining library.
Each line in the dataset has one rating, sorted by time, with the following format:
SOURCE, TARGET, RATING, TIME
The meaning for each piece of the data is as follows:
Source
The vertex ID of the rater
Target
The vertex ID of the ratee
Rating
The source’s rating for the target, ranging from –10 to +10 in steps of 1
Time
The time of the rating, measured as seconds since epoch
Let’s look at the first five lines of the data in Example 8-1.
Example 8-1.
$ head -5 soc-sign-Bitcoinotc.csv
6,2,4,1289241911.72836
6,5,2,1289241941.53378
1,15,1,1289243140.39049
4,3,7,1289245277.36975
13,16,8,1289254254.44746
Let’s examine the first line of data from Example 8-1: 6,2,4,1289241911.72836. This
means that the person with ID 6 trusts the person with ID 2 a total of 4. This rating
Finding Paths in a Trust Network | 235

--- Page 256 ---
was captured at 1289241911.72836 epoch time, or Monday, November 8, 2010, at
13:45 GMT.
The original source data has time in epoch. The data that accompa‐
nies this book uses the ISO 8601 standard because we converted
the timestamps for ease of understanding in our examples. For
example, 1289241911.72836 in epoch time converts to
2010-11-08T13:45:11.728360Z in the ISO 8601 standard.
Before we can build out interesting queries and a data model, let’s take a tour of the
world of Bitcoin terminology.
A Brief Primer on Bitcoin Terminology
Bitcoin is a cryptocurrency, which is used as a decentralized digital currency, mean‐
ing there is no central bank or institution that controls its value. Instead, Bitcoin is
exchanged on a peer-to-peer network.
Each bitcoin is basically a computer file stored in a digital wallet application on a
smartphone or computer. People can send whole bitcoins or fractions thereof to your
digital wallet, and you can send bitcoins to other people. Every transaction is recor‐
ded in a public list called the blockchain.
Address
An address is a Bitcoin public key to which transactions can be sent.
Wallet
A wallet is a collection of private keys that correspond to addresses.
In our data, we are working with what we can observe on the blockchain. We can
observe the exchange of bitcoins between two people. We say you send bitcoins to or
receive bitcoins from an address. You encrypt, export, back up, and import your wal‐
let. A wallet can have multiple private keys that correspond to addresses.
From here, we are able to define a schema to use in development for our example.
Creating Our Development Schema
Though the sample data shows integers, real Bitcoin addresses actually are alphanu‐
meric strings with up to 34 characters. Therefore, we will be using the Text data type
in our graph schema for the addresses.
The data model we will need is quite simple. We have a list of addresses that rated
other addresses. An address can rate another address many times; we would like to
capture each rating by its unique rating value.
236 | Chapter 8: Finding Paths in Development

